The direct traffic channel refers to traffic that came
to your site without clicking on a link in another domain.
Instead, it's the traffic that came by typing in the URL of your site,
in the URL bar or by clicking on a previously saved bookmark.
Monitoring direct traffic to your site can
give you an indication of the strength of your brand.
For instance, if I'm beta brand a lot of my traffic may come to me through my email and
advertising campaigns but over time
as people get to know the brand and what it stands for,
they may come to decide without these triggers.
If the number of people accessing your site directly increases,
it may tell you that more people know and remember your brand's.
However, it has become less straightforward to come to
that conclusion as fewer and fewer people typing URLs in the browser bar.
We've become accustomed to the search engines being super good at providing
us the results fast and as a result people will often
type the brand name of a sites they want to navigate to
inner search engine rather than spell out
a full URL in the browser bar even if they know the URL.
Nonetheless, let's take a look at what we find in the direct traffic report.
The detail behind that direct traffic report provides you with
the landing pages where that traffic enters the site.
When looking at this report for the Google merchandise store,
you may be a bit surprised seeing URLs like the ones here.
I'm surprised anyone recall that URL by heart.
It also seems strange to assume that a lot of people would bookmark this.
This actually points to one of the common issues with the direct traffic report.
Google Analytics will categorize traffic as direct when it does
not see a referring domain in the data it records.
This happens when there's no domain to record
like in the case when you type in the URL directly.
But it can also happen when traffic comes in by clicking on
a link in a document outside the typical browser environment.
So that could be in an email for instance,
in Outlook or in a PDF document.
In a case like that no referring domain is passed on to Google.
So, Google would bucket this traffic into the direct channel.
If these links relate to an email marketing campaign for instance,
you can avoid this from happening by using UTM codes as we discussed before.
That way you can pass information to Google to let
Google know that this link is associated with a campaign.
If you forget to do this,
the traffic may be labeled direct traffic and that makes it harder for
you as a marketer to get a good understanding of the success of your campaigns.
So, now that it looks like the direct traffic report for
the merchandise store includes some traffic that does not seem to really be direct,
how can you use this report?
Well, if you really want to understand how many people come to the store directly,
you can do so by isolating the direct traffic that lands on the homepage.
You can click on the homepage link as you see in the image.
While this could still include some other traffic,
it will give you the best approximation of the real direct traffic that
people who remember your name and brand and use the URL to get to your site.